Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
She began publishing professionally in 1953, some 30 years ago, but she had been writing
long before that even.
Like many other present-day science fiction authors, Bradley was introduced to the field
through the pulp magazines in the golden age of science fiction.
Well, when I was a child, I thought that if I wanted to grow up and be a writer, I would
probably write historical fiction, because that was what I liked best at that time, although
I always loved things like writer Haggard, but they were in such old books that I decided
they weren't being published anymore.
Then when I discovered the new pulp magazines, astounding, thrilling wonder, that sort of
thing, and I saw the fan magazines in the back, the fan scenes and the letters from
fans, I thought, my goodness, there are other people who like this sort of thing, and all
of a sudden I realized not only that I wanted to write for a living, but that I wanted to
write science fiction and fantasy.
Bradley is high on the value of science fiction and believes it can be of benefit to anyone.
People are always asking me why I write science fiction when there are so many other things
or why I'm not into mainstream fiction, and I have written mainstream novels, but my feeling
is science fiction is a very... and fantasy, of course, is a very valuable genre because
it forces people to think.
You can't just, oh, I suppose you can in the slam bang action stuff, but even in those,
there is a residue of what if the world were different than it is now.
People in our society and in our schools are supposed to have a keep tight to reality
and not imagine things and don't be so imaginative, and I think imagination is the one great thing
that distinguishes us from the beasts, and science fiction is a very valuable corrective
to modern education because it makes people think and it forces them to stretch their
imaginations which get sort of atrophied in the average school.
Much of Bradley's work deals with parapsychology, telepathy, ESP, things having to do with
the occult.
We ask her why these topics interested her so much.
Well, possibly because, as I said before, I began my reading with such people as Ryder
and they, of course, were all roughly connected, which I found out later, to the Golden Dawn
Order, the magical order in England.
Also, there is a lot of history.
Fantasy sort of comes out of the occultism, as it were, and what's now called the Neopagan
religions, but of course they didn't exist at that time.
So I thought I was the only person interested in these things, and when I got into Haggard,
Mundi, people like that, I realized this is what I was looking for.
There are a lot of people, I think, who look in science fiction and fantasy for validation
of the fact that there are other things in life than you might say, the mundane round
and materialism.
And those of us who can't get into conventional religion, which I've never been able to do
for various and sundry reasons, we use that, I think, as a way of looking for what was
real in religion behind the dogma and behind all the nonsense and hellfire.
Bradley is published around 50 novels so far, in addition to numerous short stories, essays,
and various other literary projects.
Not all of her novels have been science fiction or fantasy.
Most of the ones that are concern the planet Darkover, her most popular creation.
There are some 15 novels in the Darkover series presently, and the list is still growing.
Next time we'll talk to Bradley about her Darkover series.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Among the most popular of science fiction stories would have to be the Darkover stories
of Marion Zimmer Bradley.
The series would have to be considered as one of the most enduring, too.
So far it numbers some 15 novels and two collections of short stories, and more novels are on the
way.
Darkover is a planet. It circles a red sun, which gives it a rich, dusky atmosphere.
The highest culture on Darkover consists of descendants of humans who crash-landed on
the planet many centuries before.
And they've developed telepathic powers. Their whole culture is based on the use of these
mental powers, rather than on technology.
Humans from Earth eventually rediscover Darkover, and there is a conflict between the two cultures.
The technological emphasis of Earth and its empire, versus the slower, provincial, almost
feudal society of the Darkovens, which is based on telepathy.
Even though the novels and stories of Darkover are related, Bradley did not consider them
as a series when she started writing about Darkover.
I started trying to do that around the time I wrote Forbidden Tower. Originally, no.
I had a feeling, and other writers told me rather cynically, that the life of a paperback
book was about five or six months that nobody...
And so I assumed... I realized it was not safe to assume that anyone who read any of
my books had ever read a previous book or would ever read another book by me. So I worked
very hard to make each book stand on its own feet and not assume any knowledge of previous
books.
We asked her if she considered each Darkover story as a separate creation and not part of
a consistent whole.
That's right. I try very hard to make each book have its own internal consistency and
logic, but if the books don't jive with one another, then the readers are just going to
have to use their own imagination to fill in the gaps.
She explains why she writes so often about Darkover.
Well, it started originally from laziness. I was going to college, putting myself through
college, and then later, I was supporting a sick husband and a couple of children when
I married for the second time. And my husband was quite ill and couldn't work much, and
the babies were still in diapers. And it was the only job I could take that would let me
stay home and look after them, because, well, it was really too really easy to cope with
that.
So I figured if I could sell books while I was putting myself through college, I could
certainly do it while I was home looking after the kids. And so I started writing.
And when you have a nice setting and background, which is as fully worked out as Darkover was
for me, well, you tend to go back to it rather than trying to invent a whole new world, partly
because it's easier and partly because you realize you haven't, the books are tailored
to, in those days, the books were tailored to such close commercial restrictions about
length and so forth, that I realized every time that I'd had to cut out so much from
my own thinking about the book, that what I'd cut out would make a sizable new book,
and it was a lot simpler. I figured that since people would read lots of books about Tarzan
or Perry Mason or Nero Wolfe or whatever, people evidently liked reading about stories
with the same background. It was easier to write them than to invent a whole new universe
for each book. That is, as I say at the beginning, it was laziness. Then later, I wanted to give
up the whole thing because I thought people must be getting tired of it. And I told Don
Walheim this and he said, oh no, people are always asking when is there going to be another
book about Darkover? And so I decided, good heavens, if it really is a series, maybe I
ought to start thinking of it as a series and take it seriously that way.
The first Darkover novel, The Sword of Aldonis, was published in 1962. The latest, Hawk Mistress,
was released recently in paperback.
Bradley has signed a contract for two more Darkover novels, so the series will be growing
in the coming years. Science fiction readers will be delighted at that news. We'll continue
our discussion with Marion Zimmer Bradley next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show. The first Darkover novel, The Sword
of Aldonis, is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon.
Marion Zimmer Bradley's Darkover stories are based on one overall conflict, the technological
might of Earth versus the telepathic powers of the inhabitants of Darkover.
The planet Darkover, circling a blood-red sun, contains valuable crystals which greatly
magnify and concentrate telepathic ability. These crystals are the bases of the Darkovin
civilization.
Earth wants access to the crystals, and it wants Darkover as part of its interstellar
empire.
But the Darkovens resist. The conflict never really breaks into a full-scale interplanetary
war, but the tension leads to all sorts of intrigues, skirmishes, and spying activities.
Relying on their middle powers is the Darkovens do. They've never developed a technology.
In fact, they often seem anti-technological, though Bradley says this is not the case.
I don't think so much anti-technological as thinking that perhaps there are better
ways to do things than by technology. It isn't so much anti-technological as a concept that
possibly the same kind of technology does not fit every planet, just as materialism
does not fit every human mind, that there are different universes for different mental
sets. I think I'm a very sort of alternative culture person myself, and from the time I
was a child I have never liked the idea that everybody has to fit into the same lockstep
and be, well, they now say, be clones. My daughter calls the ordinary kids at school
who never think of anything except football games, clones. Well, I felt that way when
I was a youngster, and so I suppose the idea of leaving open options and choices for everybody
so they can find the kind of lifestyle that suits them best instead of blambly assuming
that everybody has to belong to the same lifestyle. That was something that I felt very strongly
about when I was a kid, and I feel even more strongly about than I did when I was 15.
Bradley seems to be fairly even-handed in presenting the conflict between Darkoven and
Earth, but she also has sympathy for Darkoven's position and even seems to admire its way
of life. We asked her if it would be fair to say that she tends to be slightly on the
side of non-technological Darkoven. No, it would not. My very life is dependent on technology.
I am myself a diabetic and dependent upon medical preparations which are very difficult
to get in an anti-technological or non-technological culture. It is simply that I like, I do what
you call an even-handed job because, well, my husband says it's because I'm a Gemini,
and it's true that I am cursed with seeing two sides of everything. When I was a kid
and reading in school about what a terrible person Benedict Arnold was, I still realized
that to the British, she was a hero, and it suddenly occurred to me that the villain is
always, except for really real criminals like mass murderers, rapists, that sort of thing,
almost every quote, villain, unquote, is just the victim of a political conflict, he's
the hero of the other side. One thing, though, that Bradley admires in the Darkoven society
is the compact. The compact outlaws, guns, explosives, or energy weapons of any kind.
Any fighting must be done with swords, knives, bows and arrows, and so forth. In this day
and age with nuclear weapons every place, I think every human being has to be in sympathy
with the compact or if they aren't, there's something wrong with their brains. At least
under the compact, if you have only a sword or a knife, you can do only one person's
amount of damage. I suppose it's my emotional reaction to the fact that when I was 15 years
old, it became possible to wipe out all human life on earth if one paranoid politician presses
the wrong button. And I think maybe that's too much power and would like to see power
back in the hands of individuals over their own lives. I don't like the idea that we are
all, you might say, hostages in a monstrous political and ideological conflict. I can't
believe that God is on one side and that on the other there is only the devil.
On our next show, we'll discuss one of Bradley's Darkoven novels, The Shattered Chain.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. The Shattered Chain is one of the 15 Science Fiction novels
that presently make up Marion Zimmer Bradley's series about the planet Darkoven.
The novel deals with one of the basic problems or dilemmas of the Darkoven society, the position of women.
And in doing that, the book also confronts the same issue in our society today. It treats the role of women
in a sensitive, understanding manner. The novel follows three women, Lady Rohana, a noble Darkoven
woman with children, Ja'elle, the leader of a band of free Amazon warrior women, and Magda,
an Earth woman who becomes involved with the free Amazons.
The free Amazons are a sisterhood of Darkoven women who have dropped out of normal society.
They order their lives with the principles contained in the oath of the free Amazons.
The idea behind the oath is total freedom, both physically and emotionally, from a male-dominated culture.
The oath has been admired by women's liberation readers. We ask Bradley what the impetus behind it was.
As a matter of fact, it was sort of spontaneous. I was writing along in the story, and I had the slightest idea
of what was going to happen until Magda ran into the free Amazons. And I thought, well, what would they do to her?
They certainly wouldn't kill her because they're peaceful people. And then it suddenly occurred to me,
the penalty for passing yourself off as an Amazon might be to be forced into actually observing their laws.
And so, also, it was in a way a literary device to get Magda among them to explore it,
explore it from the heroine's eye. But I found myself suddenly just writing down the oath.
I didn't figure it out beforehand. I just said, now, what would this group of people be,
the people who came among them, and that sort of just poured out?
Both Magda and Lady Rohanna admire the free Amazons. Magda, in fact, chooses to become one.
But Rohanna remains a normal, dark-haven woman. She stays with her husband and children,
and though she sympathizes with the free Amazon, she speaks for the traditional women's role.
We ask Bradley if she sympathizes with Rohanna.
Of course I do, because I lived in a world where these restrictions became part of our lives,
and a lot of, for instance, very liberated women.
I would like very much to join them in many ways, but having taken on responsibilities,
my kids are here. You can't divorce your children. You can't take back the commitments you've made.
It's also true that this kind of freedom is not for everybody.
I, for instance, would absolutely love to sail single-handed around the world,
or climb Mount Everest, but I had children until I was too old to do so,
and nowadays there is really no great reason for me to strike out and do this.
I have a great deal of sympathy and admiration for people who can do these things, but I can't.
Just as I think Rohanna had a great deal of admiration for the free Amazon,
her attitude is, well, if I had known about this kind of thing when I was a young girl,
instead of just believing all sorts of lies about them, I probably would have been one too,
but it's too late for that, and I had another, you might say, that God had meant something else for me.
But Bradley also presents the free Amazon with compassion and understanding.
She tells us why they're important.
I think the free Amazons were created out of my wish to realize that in a society so abnormally restrictive,
there must be some kind of a safety valve where the society would blow to pieces.
So there had to be some kind of an honorable alternative provided in the society for women,
and for that matter for men who simply could not live under the pressures of that kind of society.
We thought that feminist readers of the Shattered Chain would be pleased at the free Amazons
in the way Bradley treats women in the novel, but Bradley says that isn't so.
As a matter of fact, the real heavy feminists believe that I'm sort of a pussycat, a Mickey Mouse,
because I don't go far enough in men hating.
They said I didn't have the courage to go far enough and create a society where men had actually been eliminated,
a true feminist society.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Marion Zimmer Bradley is one of Science Fiction's most distinguished writers.
She's been publishing Science Fiction in fantasy for 30 years,
and her dark over novels have attracted a large following of readers.
Today there are a large number of first class women writers in the field of Science Fiction,
but when Bradley began publishing in the early 1950s, there weren't many around.
And looking over a list of Science Fiction authors from the 40s and 50s in fact,
it's hard to find more than a couple of women writers.
There were a great many women in fantasy.
It was just hard Science Fiction, which appealed mostly to young men and to engineering students,
or so the editors fondly believed, where women were sort of taboo.
It was like the audience was supposed to be young white males,
and so it was like the audience for Western stories.
The Embower, Bertha Bower, had to call herself just the Embower
because they believed that the young cowboys who read the stuff
would not be willing to read stuff by a person named Bertha,
which sounded like a little old lady knitting socks.
But she was one of the very best of Western writers,
and eventually they were able to cope with it and let her be so.
Bradley believes Science Fiction has changed in the time she's been in the field,
and she thinks women writers have been partially responsible for the changes.
We asked her what she thought some of the changes have been.
Well, part of it is when I started writing it,
it was once again, it was sort of technological daydreams for young engineering students.
It's a lot about spaceships and journeys to the moon and the conquest of stars
and gadgets and all that sort of thing.
In the middle 40s, the work of Theodore Sturgeon and even more,
the work of the Kuttner pair, and anybody who has read the books very seriously
knows that Catherine was the dominant writer of that pair.
C. L. Moore wrote a lot of the stuff with the Kuttner pen name on it
because once again, the audience was supposed to be mostly male,
and the two of them were working so closely together that they never cared
who wrote a specific story, it was all just Kuttner and Moore.
But a lot of the stories that appeared with Hank's name on it were Kuttners,
and Catherine, like many women, is more interested in the effects of gadgets on people
than she was in gadgets, and she almost single-handed reformed the whole field.
There was a time during the 40s and early 50s when the Kuttners,
when the two Kuttners wrote almost everything that appeared in the big magazines
under a variety of pen names.
They'd have three or four stories in an issue sometimes.
And so gradually, also because Hank and Catherine were both preparing to work with psychology,
they were both studying to be psychotherapists,
they became very interested in the causes of people's behavior.
This increased importance of behavior or psychology in science fiction,
which Bradley credits C. L. Moore with helping bring about,
also helps explain the popularity of fantasy today.
I think the big change has been away from technology itself
and into the effect which technology has on people,
and then when you start delving into people's minds,
what you come to is fantasy under which they cloak their deepest feelings and desires.
You might say the very depths of their unconscious where nothing is censored.
Fantasy is, you might say, the subconscious with the self-censor turned off.
Bradley's own fiction is strong in characterization and in realistic human psychology.
The people she creates are always believable and deep.
But that doesn't mean her narratives are slow.
She writes exciting science fiction.
Thank you for watching.